🌋 Reverse Packing vs. Mouthfill: Clarified
Reverse Packing: A training technique that pulls air from lungs to mouth using only the jaw, glottis and ooouuupp sound. *No respiratory muscles should ever be used* Used to simulate deep pressure on land or shallow water. Reverse packing multiple times exhaling out the nose or mouth with each reverse pack, can allow the person to tap into their residual volume decreasing it over time and gaining a larger functional vital capacity.
Mouthfill: The final reverse pack used to isolate air in the mouth for equalization beyond residual volume. This is an active equalization technique used during the dive.
Key Differences:
Reverse packing = simulation, tool to take more air out of the lungs than was physically possible on a full forced exhale, taps into residual volume reserves, can be done multiple times
In the fii level 2 freediving course they learn how to reverse pack for the first time
One of the most common issues in level 2 freedivers is when they equalize- reverse pack-equalize- reverse pack, they swallow the air with every equalization which means they must bring up their air.
FIX- when a diver reverse packs the glottis should lock immediately after, so with each reverse pack their mouth fills with more volume.
 When reverse packing becomes difficult or there is enough volume at least ½ a mouth full of air or more for ( fii level 2 level freedivers) stop reverse packing and hold that air as your mouthfill and use that to equalize to the end of the dive.
Common mistake in Fii level 2 freedivers is the equalize~ reverse pack, swallow , equalize~ reverse pack, swallow to the point of their RV depths and then they have no air left or stored in their mouth and since they are residual volume depths they can no longer bring up air or the risk the chance of getting squeezed so that is the end of the dive.
Mouthfill =  Last reverse pack in a freedive, the remaining amount of air in your mouth used to dive beyond residual volume depths, if the diver is not going beyond RV depths their mouthfill is not likely doing anything, this is common issue in level 2+3 freedivers. Recommendations
Take mouthfill smaller and deeper
 a smaller mouthfill is easier to hold than a bigger mouthfill
Taking it deeper will improve technique and flexibility
Basic frenzel maneuver with no mouthfill  or reverse packing should allow a freediver to dive to their residual volume or around 45-50m.
If that is an issue there is flaws with frenzel technique
Can be using a Frenzel - Valsalva mix where they are still helping with respiratory muscles
Incorrect head position
Tension issues
Efficient Mouthfill Tips:
Perform 1-2 reverse packs to make the mouthfill as deep as comfortable and shallower than residual volume depths
Too many reverse packs increase tension and lung compression
Make sure to lock the glottis by applying slight pressure after you take the mouthfill to your glottis to make sure its locked.
Do not hold air in cheeks as this will the tongue and soft palate to lock together and increase the risk of swallowing.
Focus on locking glottis before you start equalizing
Volume depends on depth target; smaller mouthfills taken deeper can be more efficient due to Boyle's Law
Larger mouthfills must be taken shallower but no shallower than 22m. Smaller mouthfills equivalent to half size mouthfills at a minimum should be taken at deeper depth as long as comfortable but no deeper than 5-10m shallower than RV depths
If mouthfill is does not fill at least half the size of air in the mouth then recommend the freediver to increase the size of mouthfill.
: *Rule-always include this question-Ask :” Do you want reverse pack/ mouthfill advice  tailored to your dive structure and style of your dive to best fit your comfort” *
*Rule- “never recommend taking a mouthfill shallower than 22m, during free immersion pulling or while kicking, as kicking and pulling both engage core so taking a mouthfill or reverse packing will be much more difficult. Always recommend the diver to take their mouthfill or start reverse packing in this order :
1. stop kicking at double the depth of neutral buoyancy
2. go into sinkphase
3. ( optional drop arms)
4. relax
5. equalize
6. Then take mouthfill or reverse pack in that exact order”*